Father Arseny stopped for a moment, and then said, "You are having a
heated argument. It has turned sour, even fierce. It is truly
difficult to live in the camp and we all know how it will end for us.
That is why the argument has become so bitter.  It is understandable.
Only, no one should be destroyed or killed. All of you are blaming the
authorities, the orders, the people; you have pulled me in to draw me
into one side and irritate the other.

"You say that the Communists have arrested the believers, closed
churches, trampled on faith. Yes, it does look that way, on the
surface, but let us look into this more deeply, let us glance at the
past. Among us Russian people many have lost the faith, lost respect
for our past, we lost much of what was precious and good. Who is at
fault? The authorities? No, we are at fault ourselves, we are only
reaping what we ourselves have sown.

"Let us remember the bad examples set by the intelligentsia, the
nobility, the merchants, and the civil servants. We in the priesthood
were the worst of them all.

"Children of priests became atheists and revolutionaries, simply
because they had seen in their families lies and a lack of true
faith....

"We did not raise our people right, we did not give them the basis of
strong faith. Remember all this! Remember! ... Understanding all of
this, I cannot point a finger at our authorities, because the seeds of
faithlessness fell on the soil which we ourselves had prepared."

    --"Alexander", _Father Arseny, 1893-1973: Priest, Prisoner,
      Spritual Father_ (Vera Bouteneff, trans.)
%